Title: About Me
Date: 2019-06-14
save_as: pages/about.html

### I'm Jeffrey Grover, a Bioinformatician.

I work with "big data" (and small, and medium data!) from "next-generation 
sequencing" (since it's available now isn't it actually "current-gen?"). I've
analyzed data from small RNA-sequencing, mRNA-sequencing, and whole-genome
bisulfite-sequencing over the course of my PhD work. I'm excited to soon be
transitioning to a career following the completion of my doctoral studies in the
Spring-Summer of 2020.

If you're looking for someone with my skillset I'm very interested in hearing
from you!

### Getting Here Wasn't Straightforward

I grew up in a small town in southwest Michigan, called Niles. Though, it'd be
more appropriate to say that I grew up in
[Edwardsburg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edwardsburg,_Michigan), an even more
obscure one, technically a "village" of 1,226 (2017) people. Small, but by no
means isolated. It's located only 10 minutes' drive from The University of Notre
Dame's campus in South Bend, Indiana, and roughly 2 hours drive from Chicago.

Through my years growing up in this small community, I was always interested in
technology. Building and repairing computers was part time job for me in high
school. I also learned a bit of web development at this time, which was my first
exposure with programming. I dabbled in the open source software community,
installing Linux on my parents computer and learned basics about shell scripting.

<center>
<img src="/images/michiana.png" alt="Michiana">
</center>

I was also interested in biology and chemistry, and therefore decided to double
major in biochemistry & molecular biology and chemistry in undergrad at Michigan
State University (Go Green!), where I received my B.S. in 2011. During undergrad,
I had the opportunity to work in
[Dr. Robert Last's](https://bmb.natsci.msu.edu/faculty/robert-l-last/) lab and
assisted post-doctoral researchers on the lab's projects related to genes which
affect lipid production using the model plant *Arabidopsis thaliana*. With 
potential applications to engineering crops for better use as biofuel producers.

Following undergrad I got a job working for MPI Research, Inc. in Mattawan, MI.
Just outside of Kalamazoo (a real place, believe it or not). This was my first
exposure to science outside of academia. There I mostly extracted DNA, performed
qPCR assays, and ordered supplies for our lab. Due to the nature of their work
and the FDA's regulated (the GLPs) we also did a lot of paperwork. After two
years there I had decided to move on to graduate school.

I came to The University of Arizona looking for a change, and to complete a
professional science masters. This was a new degree that I believed fit with my
experience and my goals of continuing to work in industry. In this program I took
classes related to patent law, finance, and economics in addition to my courses
in graduate-level molecular biology and biochemistry. For my masters thesis I
worked in [Dr. Rebecca Mosher's lab](https://cals.arizona.edu/research/mosherlab/Mosher_Lab/Home.html)
and designed a qPCR-based assay for measuring DNA methylation. I also was
introduced to the field of bioinformatics for the first time. By the time I was
nearing the completion of my masters in 2015, I had decided to remain at Arizona
and pursue a Ph.D. with projects that would allow me to improve my computational
skills.

### Turning a Hobby Into a Profession

It's a rare thing indeed to turn a hobby into something you can make a living
off of. However, I believe I have the skillset and mentality to contribute to
a variety of genomics and data science projects. If I don't know how to do it I
can figure it out! I enjoy contributing to a team and am comfortable mentoring
other people when I have knowledge I can share.
